# Investigating Failure Modes and Enhancements of Physics-Informed Neural Networks for Power System Dynamics

> [!IMPORTANT]
> The contents of this directory have been updated _after_ the report submission deadline (28/08/2025) in accordance with prior permissions taken from the ES98C module leader. **NO LOGIC** in this directory has been changed; only comments, docstrings, markdown cells, type hinting, etc., have been added to the files to make them more readable and enable adherence to clean code standards. Directories have been renamed to provide greater clarity, and deprecated scripts have been flagged and placed in their respective directories. 

## Abstract

The need to model increasingly complex power system (PS) operations [1,2] calls upon the use of more computationally efficient and scalable methodologies. With the high computational costs of traditional numerical solvers, physics-informed neural networks (PINNs) have emerged as a promising alternative class of differential equation (DE) solvers. Despite the push for the adoption of PINNs in modelling the transient stability of electrical synchronous generators (SGs) [1,3–6], there has been no formal investigation into the performance sensitivity of PINNs under different generator conditions or the failure modes [7–11] that may explain inaccurate solutions. Moreover, the effectiveness of enhancement strategies for addressing these limitations remains unclear. The performance of PINNs is known to depend on both the differential operator governing the system and its parametrisation [7,9,10]. Previous studies employing PINNs for SG dynamics have demonstrated their utility for specific parametrisations of the governing DE known as the swing equation, yet no investigation into when and why performance may degrade, unveiling a gap in the literature. To address this gap, this report develops and trains PINNs to learn the transient dynamics of a single SG across different parametrisations, and evaluates their performance against solutions obtained from the Runge-Kutta 4,5 (RK45) integration scheme. Leveraging techniques from both scientific and traditional machine learning (ML) literature, we empirically identify the common failure modes that hinder PINN performance in capturing the true dynamics. We also evaluate the effectiveness of enhancements proposed in the literature to address the failure modes and, if unsuccessful, investigate why. By examining the SG conditions under which PINNs fail, this report seeks to clarify when they may serve as reliable tools for modelling PS dynamics. In doing so, it aims to reduce ambiguity and build confidence among PS operators and engineers in adopting PINNs as computationally efficient and scalable alternatives to traditional solvers.

### References

 [1] V. J. Nair, “Enhanced physics-informed neural networks (pinns) for high-order power grid dynamics,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.07527, 2024.
 [2] S. Chatzivasileiadis, A. Venzke, J. Stiasny, and G. Misyris, “Machine learning in power systems: Is it time to trust it?,” IEEE Power and Energy Magazine, vol. 20, no. 3, pp. 32–41, 2022.
 [3] G. S. Misyris, A. Venzke, and S. Chatzivasileiadis, “Physics-informed neural networks for power systems,” in 2020 IEEE Power Energy Society General Meeting (PESGM), pp. 1–5, 2020.
 [4] J. Stiasny, G. S. Misyris, and S. Chatzivasileiadis, “Transient stability analysis with physics-informed neural networks,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.13638, 2021.
 [5] R. Wang, M. Zhong, K. Xu, L. G. S´anchez-Cort´es, and I. d. C. Guerra, “Pinns based uncertainty quantification for transient stability analysis,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.12947, 2023.
 [6] M. Mohammadian, K. Baker, and F. Fioretto, “Gradient-enhanced physics-informed neural networks for power systems operational support,” Electric Power Systems Research, vol. 223, p. 109551, 2023.
 [7] A. Krishnapriyan, A. Gholami, S. Zhe, R. Kirby, and M. W. Mahoney, “Characterizing possible failure modes in physics-informed neural networks,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, vol. 34, pp. 26548–26560, Curran Associates, Inc., 2021.
 [8] S. Basir and I. Senocak, “Critical investigation of failure modes in physics-informed neural networks,” AIAA SCITECH 2022 Forum, Jan. 2022.
 [9] S. Wang, Y. Teng, and P. Perdikaris, “Understanding and mitigating gradient flow pathologies in physics-informed neural networks,” SIAM Journal on Scientific Computing, vol. 43, no. 5, pp. A3055–A3081, 2021.
 [10] P. Rathore, W. Lei, Z. Frangella, L. Lu, and M. Udell, “Challenges in training pinns: A loss landscape perspective,” 2024.
 [11] A. Daw, J. Bu, S. Wang, P. Perdikaris, and A. Karpatne, “Mitigating propagation failures in physics-informed neural networks using retain-resample-release (r3) sampling,” in Proceedings of the 40th International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML’23, JMLR.org, 2023
